Last September, Starbucks rolled out an
AI-powered inventory system across
11,000 stores. The idea was
straightforward. Instead of employees
manually counting every bottle of syrup
and carton of milk during inventory
checks, they'd use a handheld device
with AI-powered image recognition that
could scan a shelf and count everything
automatically. The system was supposedly
eight times faster than manual counting
with 99% accuracy. Starbucks' CTO said
it would let workers spend more time
crafting beverages and connecting with
customers. The thing is, if you actually
watch the promotional video Starbucks
made to introduce this system, the AI
misses a bottle of peppermint syrup
sitting right there on the shelf. Nine
months after that launch, Starbucks sent
an internal newsletter to employees
across all of those stores telling them
to go back to counting inventory by
hand. The system couldn't reliably count
bottles of milk. It mixed up similar
milk types and skipped items entirely.
This would be a funny one-off story if
it were just Starbucks. Right now,
across the entire tech industry, the
CEOs who bet everything on AI are
quietly reversing course. They're
canceling data centers, rehiring the
humans they laid off, getting sued by
their own franchisees, and quietly
walking back everything they said two
years ago. In January 2025, Microsoft
pledged $80 billion on AI data centers
in a single fiscal year. Satya Nadella
painted a picture of an AI-powered
future that demanded massive
infrastructure. One month later,
analysts at TD Cowen found that
Microsoft had canceled or walked away
from data center projects totaling over
2 gigawatts of capacity. They had also
let letters of intent on larger
footprint sites expire and abandoned at
least five land parcels that were
already under construction. Nadella
himself eventually admitted that there
will be an overbuild of AI
infrastructure. Goldman Sachs ran the
numbers on the entire AI data center
boom and found that the market had
already added $19 trillion to AI exposed
company values since 2022. [music]
Their analysts warned that this looks a
lot like the dot-com bubble where the
internet was absolutely real, but
investors still lost trillions betting
on companies that never figured out how
to make money from it. And the money is
only part of the story because the
companies that went ahead and fired
people to replace them with AI are now
hiring those people back. In February
2024, Klarna CEO Sebastian Siemiatkowski
made headlines everywhere when he
announced that their AI chatbot was
doing the equivalent work of 700
full-time customer service agents. He
said it handled 2.3 million
conversations in its first month. The
company froze hiring and slashed its
workforce from over 7,000 people down to
around 3,000. 15 months later,
Siemiatkowski told Bloomberg something
very different. He admitted the AI first
push had destroyed the quality of their
customer service, that the company had
been too focused on cutting costs, and
that investing in human support [music]
was actually the way forward. So, Klarna
launched a rehiring drive. Then, there's
Duolingo. CEO Luis von Ahn sent an
internal memo in April 2025 declaring
the company AI first and phasing out
contractors. The backlash was immediate.
He told Times he didn't expect the
amount of blowback and that he did not
see AI replacing what their employees
do. By April 2026, he had completely
backtracked on requiring AI usage in
performance reviews, saying the most
important thing is that you're doing
your job as well as possible. And if AI
can't help with that, he wasn't going to
force it. Salesforce CEO Mark Benioff
revealed in September 2025 that their AI
agent had let them shrink customer
support from roughly 9,000 people to
5,000. By April 2026, Benioff completely
reversed tone. He announced Salesforce
was hiring a thousand new graduates,
apparently forgetting that he had spent
the previous two years explaining why
those jobs no longer needed to exist.
But replacing workers is only half the
story. The AI tools these companies are
still using internally are burning
through money at a pace nobody planned
for. Uber recently that 95% of its
engineers use AI tools monthly and 70%
of their committed code is AI generated.
But they have already burned through
their entire 2026 budget for AI coding
tools in just four months. The company
admitted the budget was completely
exhausted, calling it a head-exploding
moment. The core problem is that all of
that AI usage hasn't translated into
anything Uber can actually measure. The
company admitted there's no clear
connection between those stats and
shipping more useful features to
customers. And without that connection,
the cost just keeps [music] climbing for
no reason. And right around the same
time, Microsoft started canceling most
of its internal Claude Code licenses and
forcing engineers to switch to their own
GitHub Copilot tool by June 30th. The
decision wasn't made because Claude Code
performed badly. It was actually the
opposite. Engineers liked it too much.
They were choosing it over Microsoft's
own product and the token-based pricing
was making it expensive at enterprise
scale. And then, there's the most
extreme case so far. Just this week, it
came out that an unnamed enterprise
client ran up a $500 million bill on AI
tools in a single month. The company
gave thousands of employees unlimited
access with no spending caps. MIT's
GenAI Divide report found that 95% of
enterprise AI projects deliver zero
measurable return on investment. And a
study by OrgVue, surveying over a
thousand senior leaders, found that 39%
of companies made layoffs specifically
because of AI. And of those, more than
half now admit they made the wrong
decision. Businesses are learning the
hard way that replacing people with AI
without fully understanding the impact
can go badly wrong. And now, even the
people who built this technology are
backtracking. Sam Altman, the CEO of
OpenAI, spent the last two years telling
everyone that AI would replace nearly
half of all work tasks in the near
future. Then, just recently at a
conference in Sydney, he turned around
and said he was delighted to be wrong.
He admitted that AI hadn't displaced
nearly as many jobs as he expected, and
that his predictions about the economic
impact were just off. Dario Amodei, the
CEO of Anthropic, did the same thing. In
2025, he went on record saying AI could
eliminate half of all entry-level
white-collar jobs within five years and
push unemployment to 10 or 20%. Now,
he's reframing AI as something that
expands the work people do rather than
replacing them. Mark Zuckerberg, who
committed tens of billions to AI
infrastructure, now admits there's a
real possibility this whole thing
follows the same pattern as past
infrastructure bubbles. The finance
world is saying the same thing. Jamie
Dimon, who runs the largest bank in
America, has warned that AI companies
are massively overvalued and that a
crash is a real possibility. Ray Dalio,
the founder of the world's largest hedge
fund, went further saying we're clearly
in the early stages of an AI bubble and
comparing the moment to the years
[music] right before the dot-com crash.
And now, the consequences are already
showing up in court. A Pizza Hut
franchisee that operates a hundred and
eleven locations filed a hundred million
lawsuit against the parent company over
a mandated AI dispatch system. Before
the AI deployment, over 90% of
deliveries arrived within 30 minutes.
After the AI was installed, about 50% of
deliveries took 45 minutes or longer.
Same-store sales in New York City swung
from double-digit growth to nearly
negative 10% year-over-year. The
complaint says the AI system did the
exact opposite of improving efficiency.
It caused significant delays and
destroyed consumer satisfaction. The
system stripped managers of operational
control and introduced algorithmic
behaviors that slowed production and
delivery.
Air Canada already lost a tribunal case
after their chatbot invented a
bereavement fare policy that didn't
exist. The airline tried to argue that
the chatbot was a separate legal entity
responsible for its own actions. The
tribunal called that remarkable and
ruled against them. And then there's
Builder.ai, a startup once valued at
over a billion dollars and backed by
Microsoft. They claimed their AI could
build software automatically, but it
turned out human engineers were doing
most of the work behind the scenes. When
a hundred and eighty million dollars in
accounting fraud surfaced on top of
that, the company collapsed and
creditors came after them. From
billion-dollar collapses to
hundred-million-dollar lawsuits, the
cost of over-promising on AI is adding
up fast. For now, the pullbacks are
happening behind closed doors, but
that's not going to last.